Phat Contract Document (#150)
Phala-Network/phala-wiki-next: content/en-us/build/stateless/language-basic.md

---
title: "Language Basics"
weight: 1002
menu:
  build:
    parent: "phat-stateless"
---

> The Phat Contract is written in Ink! language, which is extended from Rust language (more language supports like Python and Nodejs will be provided in the future). It is finally compiled to WebAssembly (WASM), which also takes security into consideration when designed, then you can upload and deploy them.

Reviewer: Let's not promote Python and node.js in this wiki. It's too far away from an implementation, and we have no clue how it will work

Reviewer: Why mentioning "takes security into consideration when designed" here?

Author: removed.

- [rustup](https://rustup.rs/), which helps you install and manage different versions of Rust compilers;
- cargo, the package manager installed automatically along with Rust compiler. Each Rust project contains a `Cargo.toml` file to describe its metadata and dependencies, and `cargo` downloads the dependencies and builds the project for you. The [cargo book](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/index.html) can help, and ensure you understand the [[dependencies]](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/specifying-dependencies.html) and [[features]](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/features.html) sections in `Cargo.toml` before going on.

### Language Basics

The best material is surely the official [Rust book](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/).
- For a beginner, to learn the first 6 sections is enough for your journey in the Phat Contract world;
- I also recommend to finish the 7 - 10 sections when you decide to go a little deeper.

There are also many [books recommended by the community](https://www.reddit.com/r/rust/comments/sjclfb/best_book_to_learn_rust/) for more advanced topics.

## Ink!

> Ink! is the programming language developed by Parity. The native Ink! contracts can run on different blockchains (like Polkadot and Phala), but Phala adds its secret ingredient called [pink-extension](https://github.com/Phala-Network/phala-blockchain/tree/master/crates/pink) (short for Phala Ink! Extension) to form Phat Contract which is only functional in Phala's off-chain Workers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ink! is the default smart contract programming language in Polkadot ecosystem. The native Ink! contracts can run on different blockchains (like Polkadot and Phala), but Phala adds its secret ingredient called [pink-extension](https://github.com/Phala-Network/phala-blockchain/tree/master/crates/pink) (short for Phala Ink! Extension) to form Phat Contract which is only functional in Phala's off-chain Workers.
```

Reviewer: Maybe better to introduce Phala's offchain worker later? At this point, our mission is to tell developer how to write Phat Contract. Exposing too much details may not be a good idea

Author: Updated

> Phat Contract is the superset of Ink! contract.

> ### Ink! Macros

Reviewer: Besides the macros, it's also important to talk about the **concepts** like account, contract address, cross-contract call, etc

Author: We shall talk about these in chain-related opertions section.

The difference between a Ink! contract and a normal Rust program is the macros in it. As shown in our [example contract](/en-us/build/getting-started/create-contract/#create-and-compile-your-first-contract), you need to annotate the Rust code with Ink! macros so the compiler can learn your contract structure. For example,

```rust
#[ink(storage)]
pub struct OnchainState;
```

`#[ink(storage)]` tells us the following struct `OnchainState` saves the contract states and needs to be stored on-chain. And

```rust
#[ink(message)]
pub fn query_handler(&self, from: AccountId) {
    // actual implementation
}

#[ink(message)]

> pub fn transaction_handler(&mut self, from: AccountId) {

Reviewer: Transactions are for stateful program. Better to not mention it until the next section

Author: removed
